Mastery of Music Therapy: Types and Pros
Risad Malik
ILLUMINATION
Risad Malik

Published in
ILLUMINATION

·
3 min read
·

In a world rife with stress and worry, we seek shelter in an assortment of ways. Music is a perennial source of solace and healing. Listening to music might be a quick way to enhance your mood, but it’s rapidly becoming evident that there’s a lot more to music’s benefits than simply a swift mood boost. It is now clinically proven that music has a prominent effect on your body and psychology, just as a tool for entertainment.

Music therapy is an approach to therapy that helps people strengthen their psychological condition and overall well-being by utilizing music’s inherently mood-lifting effects. It can be beneficial for people to handle their depression. And the best part is that you don't need any experience in music to reap its benefits.

Major Types:
The whole process of music therapy can be active, where the person plays a role in creating music, or passive, where he or she can listen to, experience, or react to certain kinds of music.

Cognitive Behavioral Music Therapy (CBMT): This is basically an approach where cognitive behavioral therapy meets music to address mental health and emotional well-being. This strategy uses cognitive restructuring and reshaping behavior in certain situations with a structured musical approach. This process is not improvisational. The main principles of this type of therapy are
Cognitive Restructuring
Behavioral Techniques
Music-Based Interventions
Emotion Regulation etc.
The Bonny method of guided imagery and music: This is a very interesting approach to music therapy. It uses classical music to stimulate imagination for personal experience, self-discovery, and psychologic healing. It is not structured at all. It is profoundly based on the thesis that music has deeper access to deep emotional and unconscious feelings in humans.
Analytical Music Therapy: This is mainly a therapeutic process where the person plays or sings music to express their untold thoughts and emotions. Later on, therapists discuss the proper reflection of music on each sort of emotion. This is quite a tricky but creative process. It has no significant procedure or structure to follow.
Orff-Based Music Therapy: In this process instrumentals likes drums, xylophones, etc. This is often used by kids to create music and express their troubling thoughts. This is a strictly structural but playful process.
Benefits:
There are several facts to strengthen music therapy as a great approach. There is now a massive, growing demand for mental health services.

Depression and anxiety relief: It is not unknown anymore that the effect of music therapy on depression and anxiety is immeasurable. It activates the region of the brain that releases endorphins and boosts good feelings.
PTSD: Group music can be used to handle a serious mental issue like post-traumatic stress disorder.
Enhance quality of health: In general, music therapy helps people with chronic mental conditions elevate their quality of life. Patients with schizophrenia often use music therapy as their main therapeutic process.
Insomnia: Music or white noise specifically has been used deliberately to help people fall asleep. Compared to other medication processes, music works better in an organic way, which increases mental and physical health.
It’s encouraging to learn that music therapy is a potent ally as we traverse the complex realm of mental health. Its capacity to reduce symptoms, improve well-being, and provide comfort to people in need is compellingly illustrated by the facts that make up this article. Harmony is never too far away, even in a society where it often seems unattainable. Music therapy serves as a good reminder of this.